Hi, this is Nick.
It's Friday, January 23rd, 1998.
I'm on my way home to Grafton from New York City, where I participated in a couple of events involving Bibliography Week.
It's snowing, it's slippery, it's messy.
And I listened to as much news as I cared to hear about Monica Lewinsky and Bill Clinton.
And this seemed like a pretty good and appropriate time to summarize my thoughts regarding what could be a tentative outline for this new book, which I at present plan to call Life Beyond Life, colon, book people, book places, book culture.
at the dawn of a new millennium.
The title, Life Beyond Life, we derive from the famous excerpt in John Milton's Ariopagitica, where he says something to the effect that books are the precious lifeblood of a master spirit embalmed and served on purpose to a life beyond life.
And that is
as Milton saw it, and as many of us who care about books continue to see it, is the function that they serve.
They are the precious lifeblood of a master spirit.
Okay, that's background.
I'm very, very interested in really trying to crystallize
the substance of what will appear in this book in terms of how it will go into the individual chapters.
I have made a tentative, scratched out, written, decidedly informal, outlined by subject headings, and it's very sketchy and could hardly be described.
by any yardstick as being a detailed outline, but it does more or less summarize my thoughts as to what I think should go into these chapters.
Here I am doing 40 miles an hour on Interstate 84 on a pretty snowy winter day.
So if it sounds at some point like I'm distracted, it is because I am.
It's snowing and I've decided to amuse myself
and occupy this time productively by thinking out loud into this little tape recorder about the work in progress.
Okay.
I start with a prologue.
The prologue begins with Otto Bettman playing a Bach piece for Connie
and I in Florida two years ago this coming March.
Otto Bettman at that time was well into his 90s.
He has lived in and touched every decade of the 20th century.
He is a Jewish émigré who fled Germany in 1933.
He said when I interviewed him, it was like God picked me up and set me down in America.
America saved his life.
He had the foresight to get out.
When he left, he was a rare books librarian in Germany, in Berlin, I believe.
We'll have to check the files.
We have it.
It's been two years since I looked at that aspect.
But he also was a pioneer in taking photographs of documents with his new Leica.
He started taking pictures, making copies.
Isn't that interesting?
making copies.
Think about the copies when we get into that chapter a bit later, but he's making copies.
And when he came here, he brought his Leica and a trunk full of images.
And he began what became known as the Bettman Archive, which in 1996 was bought by Bill Gates' Corpus Corporation.
So now whenever you see the Bettman Archive, it's Corbis slash Bettman Archive, and the stuff is all being digitized and made available over the net.
And subsequent to the interview with Otto Bettman, I went out to Bellevue, Washington and did some interviews there with the Corbis people.
It may well be at some point that I might want to go see the original Bettman Archive in New York.
That might be pretty interesting.
We'll see as the writing goes along.
My point is that Otto touches any number of different aspects in this book, and he belongs in the prologue.
Because as he was playing this Bach piece, it was beautiful, and I tape-recorded it, I was thinking, why Bach?
And when he was done, I said to him, Dr. Bettman, why Bach?
And he said, because Bach always returns
to the same place that he started.
Now, I tentatively had planned, and I may yet still have two chapters called Continuum, Continuum One and Continuum Two.
And what is it about a continuum?
And what is it about the way I write?
When you think of General Madness,
I came back to where I started.
That's the way I like to write my stories.
I like to come back to where I started.
No matter how much I might want to improvise or wander and go far afield and do these discursive things, I always feel that I'm okay as long as I come back to where I started and it's my track.
So here's Otto expressing that, and here he is touching all of these various aspects that we will be developing in the book, and he comes back to where he started.
Well, I love that, and so therefore, we have that in the prologue.
Straight off, bang, we have come, my wife and I, to the Florida home of Otto Bettman, and he's playing this song.
and then we go into some of the material that I've already written and developed for my Biblio column.
Also in the prologue, from Otto, where we express the continuum concept, from there I will discuss how I tried, quixotically perhaps, to go and visit some of the great libraries and book places in the world.
to establish and to give a dramatic narrative in narrative fashion an adventure that would take me from Pergamum where there was still this relic, these ruins of an ancient library that one time competed straight up with Alexandria and Egypt.
and then we come forward and we go to Patmos and we go to Mount Athos and we go to St.
Gaul where St.
Columba, a medieval bibliomaniac, that might be a phrase we want to use, a medieval bibliomaniac came and established that monastery where the plans of St.
Gaul were later developed and designed
and to a great extent influenced how monasteries and scriptorio were constructed through Europe during this critical period of preservation and transmission.
But we also go to Monte Cassino, where the rule of Benedict was formulated, and we discussed the importance of that.
But this is really in chapter one.
I'm jumping ahead of myself.
But we wanted to just suggest some of this in the prologue.
And then we will conclude the prologue with the little anecdote that I have told a number of times in my public presentations at libraries around the United States, throughout the United States over the past two and a half years.
And the purpose of this anecdote is to provide a seamless transition
as seamless a transition as possible from gentle madness to life beyond life.
And so I tell the story in April of 1995 as I was feverishly attempting to get the galleys closed and corrected and off to New York so we could get the book published and out on time.
It happened that I needed to see a copy of the 1911 edition of the three-volume catalog to the library of Samuel Pepys at Modeling College, Cambridge University, England.
I won't point to this too deeply in the prologue, but the point is I needed to see the books for bibliographical purposes.
I had worked off an incomplete Xerox copy, which Richard Luckett had sent to me.
And we wanted to cite it in the bibliography and in the footnotes, and I really needed to see the books.
And I couldn't get Luckett on the phone, and so I needed to see the books.
Guess what?
I couldn't find them at Harvard.
Not the 1911 edition.
They had an earlier edition.
They had a later edition.
I couldn't find one at the Boston Public Library.
I couldn't find one in Worcester, certainly.
at Clark and there's other places that I read and there's no reason why such an art king title would be at those places anyway but lo and behold and to make a long story short I was in Boston and I went over to the Boston Athenaeum where I read and of course they don't deaccession there and their policy is to keep and to maintain and to preserve and lo and behold I find the books
They're in perfect condition.
Lovely.
Three volumes.
And the Athenaeum, and still even to this day as we speak, the books are signed out, not scanned.
And as I was signing out these books, I noticed that I am the first person in 84 years to take out these books.
There they have been.
They're dusty, but in otherwise perfect condition.
And there they are.
And I note this fact as I'm signing out the books, and I say something really incredulous and naive and dumb.
But, oh, gee, look at that.
84 years.
I'm the first person to ever take out these books.
You wonder who they bought these books for in the first place.
And so the gentleman who's there, whose name I have to get,
A silver-haired man looked me in the eyes and said, why, we bought them for you, sir.
We bought them for you, sir.
So when you think and when you wonder, as libraries throughout the United States particularly are deciding whether or not they should keep books in their libraries on the basis and on the strength of
of frequency of use.
What is the purpose of Mindbooks?
Is it just to serve today's readers or a reader who might be interested in something three or five years from now?
If a book has not been withdrawn within five years, then it's a candidate for the accession.
These are issues that we deal with later in the book.
But there's our prologue.
We bought it for you, sir.
And we go from there, immediately, from that quote, our comment upon that quote, into Chapter 1, which would be Continuum 1, or just Continuum.
I think Continuum 1, and I do believe we will conclude the book at the end with Continuum 2.
Either Roman numeral 1 and Roman numeral 2 are the words 1 and 2.
We'll see.
That remains to be determined.
But we go straight from, we got it for you, sir, to this high hill in Pergamum.
And here I am, there, to absorb the ambience of this ancient library.
And we talk about that.
And then we continue on through this cavalcade of libraries
from Pergamum to Patmos, from Patmos to Mount Athos, perhaps from Mount Athos to Monte Cassino, from Monte Cassino when a little Benedict was formed to Saint Gaul.
We're still cooking.
Now Monte Cassino is destroyed, has been destroyed four times through the centuries of its existence.
most recently in World War II, when it had been used by the Germans to direct artillery fire at Allied troops, and the Allies, after warning the residents to leave the mountain, destroyed the abbey at Munchies.
Interestingly enough, the books survived.
The place was destroyed, but the books survived.
Let me interject at this point that when I did an interview with Eva Hanebert Benz, the director of the Gutenberg Museum in Mainz in Germany, she said, you know, I was asking her about, here we were, really very, very close to where Gutenberg had set up his first printing shop.
We don't know precisely where his shop was, but it couldn't have been far from where this museum now stands.
And she said, we really don't know that.
We don't have his press.
This is an imaginative reconstruction of his press that they have there.
And none of his type survives.
And none of his records survive.
And really a very fragmentary portrait of Gutenberg himself survives.
All we have, she said, is the book.
And the book, of course, that we
Referred to here is also known as the Lutenberg Bible, the 42-line Bible, the Mediterranean Bible.
But it's the book that survives.
We're talking about paper, aren't we?
We're talking about buildings that are destroyed, buildings of stone, cresses made of steel.
They're gone.
But what you would think would be the most fragile element, the book, that survives.
So...
a very, very important point to make, I think, here, when we're at Monte Casino.
And I think you could put in parenthetically there, you know, one of our little discursive ways of writing that we enjoy doing so much mentioned the book Survive.
And I think that as we continue to write,
as I continue to write.
I'll find other examples of that.
Maybe we can use three or four of those things.
The books don't always survive, though.
But they don't survive when they are deliberately destroyed, and that would introduce the Sarajevo matter and the Cambodia matter.
But there is a sense of survival, and there is an attempt to survive.
Well, that's jumping ahead.
Excuse me.
So, I think we were last at St.
Gall and Monte Cassino.
And then at this particular point, I think I'll shoot over to England, and I'll do the Durham Cathedral Library, which survived the wrath of Henry VIII when he
and dissolved the monastery, seized their property, and destroyed their structures and burned their books.
Miraculously, Durham Cathedral Library made it through.
Once again, destruction, survival, the books survived.
Not all of them, but some.
and then maybe over to the Hereford Cathedral Library where we have chained libraries, a working chained library.
Don't forget to bring in this wonderful book, Akira Books by John Willis Clark, which is the development of library design and how that has influenced how scholarship has been conducted over the centuries.
Books are chained, they can't move, the desks are there.
Are you building your desks and cabinets and presses and your windows?
And then, of course, we have the cloisters also at Durham Cathedral, where I am led to believe that there are still authentic spaces and cells where the monks in their scriptoria work.
We'll see.
But we'll be able to get that in.
From there,
I think from there we'll either go to Italy or to Spain.
How do we want to do this?
Spain is a very interesting case study.
The Biblioteca Colombina, which was founded by the son of Christopher Columbus, who was a bibliophile, and put one of his father's books in there.
This was the first library, apparently, that was built with money from the New World, with riches obtained from the New World.
And we wish to point out here, a matter of some importance, that the history of America, history as we know it, and the history as it pertains to the Europeans who came here, not the Indians or as they are oftentimes called Native American, but the European presence in North America is bracketed by print.
It is totally
recorded in history, and not only in history, but in printed books.
It was, in fact, through a printed letter that Columbus announced his discovery.
We get that in right there.
We want to get the archive of the Indies in here, which you'll also be seeing in Spain.
And then from there we go to Italy, and I suspect that
Continuum One will conclude in Italy.
This wonderful country, this extraordinary country where you have so many libraries and different kinds of libraries.
You have in excess of 1,000 ecclesiastic libraries, which account for some 27 million books.
And that does not include the Vatican Library, which is technically not part of Italy.
It's the Vatican Library.
That's the Pope's library.
Let's pass the snowplow here.
And so it's a little tricky.
And we've passed him.
And now we're doing fine.
OK.
Now we're passing another truck.
But then you also have, I believe we'll have to ascertain, you have a half a dozen or so.
national libraries in Italy, not one like the Library of Congress here or the British Library in England or the Bibliotheque Nationale in France, etc., etc., etc.
And the reason for that is Italy, unlike these other countries, has only been a nation for about 125 years.
It was Garibaldi who pulled them together in 1876, as Umberto Eco mentioned to me.
And so all these libraries were in place, representing these various areas and regions and provinces of Italy, and they're still there.
And then we also had this string of pearls, these wonderful libraries that just kind of go across the top of Italy and then kind of snake their way down through the line.
So far, I have visited and am able now to write about the Ambrosiana in Milano, the Capitulare in Verona, the Medicea Lorenziana in Milan.
I will be visiting, I hope, the famous library in Chechnya.
It looks like Cecina, but it's Chechnya.
which Hobson says is, in fact, the oldest continuous library in the world.
And then he also says maybe even the Capitular in Verona is.
And in each of these, we have to write a little story about the prominent people in the manner which we will do at St.
Columba, at St.
Gall, at Benedict, at Monte Cassino, at, I think, Ambrosiana, or at St.
Cardinal Borromeo, who had bought books.
And this library kind of went up as a statement of the anti-Reformation, as an outpost against Luther.
Luther, whose whole movement, by the way, was made possible strictly by the printing press, and as has also been argued, the French Revolution.
Look what books, look what print, look what print hath rise.
So that's it got you.
Now, whether or not we end it there, this Continuum 1, or we go directly into the libraries of the future, I think I will save them for Continuum 2, that discussion of Continuum 2.
You know, let's just think about that right now.
Continuum 2 to conclude the book with these modern, futuristic libraries.
And for those who say the libraries are dead as we know them, why are they going up all over the world at the same time?
in addition to the ones I've visited and still plan to visit, the new ones.
I mean, there's also a new one in Mexico City, there's a new one in Tokyo, there's a new one in Sweden, which I have visited.
Everywhere.
And the epilogue, we may as well state it now, will be, I hope, assuming we can arrange it, a visit to Alexandria in Egypt, where they are building another
the great library on the site of the ancient library of Alexandria.
That is our, bringing us, like Otto Bettman, back to where we started at Frigam of the Great Rival.
So that will be the epilogue, as I now have it conceived.
So after we conclude with Italy, yes, that sounds good and that feels good.
After we conclude with Italy,
I will either go into a discussion of the emigre booksellers, the Jewish emigres, and in a much larger context than just booksellers, because unfortunately most of them are dead.
We have been able to talk with a few survivors, Marguerite Goldschmidt and Anne Rothenbacher, who talked to me about their late husbands.
I do hope at some point to talk to Anne-Marie Krauss,
daughter of Hans B. Krause and her husband, Roland Folter.
I've talked to Barney Rosenthal.
Barney, of course, gave the Malkin Lecture on the Gentle Invaders, and I have indicated to Barney that I would like to use that as the title of this chapter, Gentle Invaders.
and give him full credit, either in the main body or in an end note.
Perhaps, you know, I have no problems using somebody else's title.
I like it, I appropriate it, and I'll give credit to it.
So maybe we will do that, the tradition of booksellers.
The European tradition of booksellers
and the emigres as they came here.
Now, it'll either be in that context or do the general booksellers chapter and then do the emigres after.
I don't know.
Or I might just have to fold that emigres into the much larger bookseller chapter.
I'm not so sure that's going to work quite the way I have it in mind.
So I think maybe we will go from, let's plan to do Gentle Invaders
and then go straight into the whole tradition of book selling the european tradition of book selling and how it's maintained today in practice and then here you know the people who i have already interviewed now nico israel will either go in that
gentle invaders, even though he didn't come to America.
He hid from the Germans, the Nazis in Holland, and his brother Max was out in the woods, literally, in the forest, where he's learned medical books and became the great bookseller of medical literature.
Nico's recollections are wonderful, but he's also one of the great bookmen of his day, so we will include Nico in there, or with the gentle invaders.
I mentioned Fred Schreiber.
Fred Schreiber could go... I think Fred Schreiber goes into the Eucharist scholar, the scholar-bookseller.
The scholar-bookseller, the tradition.
All right, what we will do is discuss the... You know, as we write the thing, let's go ahead and write... Let's try and write that chapter with the Jewish booksellers.
and see if there's enough to sustain that as a chapter.
It may only be 10,000 words.
Actually, in the book culture context, so we can tell the story of Hans Krauss, of Russ Lauer, of Walter Johnson, of Schatzky, of the Rosenthal's.
Let's do it there.
As we're going along, we're discussing the tradition of the scholar, bookseller, which is what they brought.
And then we will get into a more, and also Kurt Wolf, the publisher who came here.
Otto Bettman, I think here is where we can bring Otto in.
Exiled in Paradise, that whole idea of being exiled in paradise, here.
And perhaps we begin this chapter with an image of Christelnacht.
Or we save that for the Sarajevo segment.
Well, we'll just have to play it by ear and see how best it works.
So, among booksellers, scholar booksellers, Pia Beres, Carlo Alberto Chiesa,
John Maggs, I don't know if he's a scholar per se, but his company is certainly distinguished.
We would mention Quaritch to a degree, but we really didn't get anybody over there to help us.
I'm tired of Arthur Freeman, frankly.
And he didn't give us anything useful or worthwhile.
So I think we'll leave Arthur alone.
But Steve Weissman, for sure.
Peter Howard, these are Americans.
Well, Weissman is an emigre in reverse, isn't he?
He's gone back to England.
Roger says he's essential.
And Steve gave us some pretty good stories.
In America, Peter Howard and Bill Reese.
I haven't interviewed Bill yet.
I have to interview Bill.
Bring in Priscilla Javelis, Leona Rostenberger, Madeline Stern.
scholar booksellers.
Priscilla Jubeles, who I want in here in some capacity, and perhaps this is the place to put her.
Or if it comes to pass that I do a chapter on the book arts, which I would really like to do, I'll say Priscilla for the book arts chapter.
Book arts.
The book arts.
Maybe that's what we'll call it, unless we can come up with something a little more singy.
So, okay, so we've got the first three chapters, we've got the prologue, and we've got the first three chapters.
Now, how will develop from here remains to be seen, and I have the feeling.
We do have a couple of chapters that are narrative-driven.
And they include...
the destruction of the Sarajevo Library.
You see, because the future is not entirely rosy and brave New World-ish, is it?
The human capacity to create and to preserve and to do wonderful things is balanced by the human capacity to destroy.
The war on culture, the war on memory, that was a possible chapter titled
which I got from Andreas Riedelmeier at Harvard.
I will save that.
That's not at this particular point.
I need something to come right after the scholar booksellers.
And I think, actually, what would work nice at this particular point, but this all remains to be seen, are the writers and artists
who have been shaped by their books, by their reading.
And these would include Maurice Sendak, Umberto Eco, Stephen Jay Gould, Tilly Olsen thus far, and also for background, or I may say William Blake.
If I do a book arts chapter, then Blake will go in there.
If not, he goes in here.
Milton, John Milton, who graduated cum laude from Cambridge University.
A brilliant man.
After his graduation, continued to read.
He spent the next five years reading, preparing himself for the work at hand.
George Bernard Shaw, who
It's a product of the British Library, and Alfred Kazin is a product of the New York Public Library.
Certainly has paid great debts to the contributions of the New York Public Library.
You know, we understand that Malcolm X learned how to read in a prison library.
Isn't that interesting?
We have Borges.
I also don't know where this would work, but I want to just keep it in mind as something to use at some point, but the writers, the great writers who have been librarians, and I do believe that it includes Geta, Borges, Lessing, Casanova's not a great writer, but he was a librarian, Archibald McLeish,
And we'll think of some other people.
So that's what we'll do with the writers.
But then we also want a reading chapter.
A reading chapter.
And whether or not these people are in the reading chapter, or there are two reading chapters, we'll just have to determine that by how it writes.
But I like when Tony Grafton gave that speech a year ago today at the Bibliographical Society of America meeting, which I attended.
I'm not attending today because of the snow.
I'm down at 35 miles an hour in central Connecticut.
He gave a really exciting talk, a copy which I really do have to get you from Arthur Steyer or from Tony Grafton.
It's about reading, he said, is really hot.
All right, so reading, reading, what we get from reading, the annotations of reading is, you have Coleridge, one of the great readers of all time, who thoroughly kept a reader's notebook.
Virginia Woolf, who wrote an essay on how to read, but who never was schooled formally, was entirely educated at home.
Don't forget to bring in Abraham Lincoln.
Never went past the second grade, did he?
And a couple of anecdotes we picked up on him.
And then the nice little story that we already have, the four books a year story, which I've already written.
And I think it's pretty clean, the way it's written.
The Stephen Cusisto story, which I just wrote, the fellow who quite literally
was told that reading is dangerous to his health, and we talk about that, and he carried around a letter which said he can only read for half an hour a time, and then his eye was damaged by a sharp bookmark.
You know, it's a cute story.
It's not cute, it's poignant again, and I don't want to use that word, but when people say reading is dangerous, it makes you think.
This is where it's physically dangerous.
I've never actually heard of any other case where reading is physically dangerous to your health.
And I would contrast that immediately right there, immediately right there.
Next segment, pop.
The pediatrician in Boston who recently was written up in the New York Times.
I forget his name, but I have it in the database.
and and he runs a medical center in boston for four people and as part of his program they actually prescribe books books are made part of the early care and attention that they give and every kid that comes in for a checkup a routine checkup a physical is given a book
instead of a lollipop or a toothbrush or whatever.
And the hope is that by the time the kid enters first grade, the kid has a small home library of books.
They've started to build their library.
And so we go from books being injurious to your health and books being beneficial to your health in a very literal sense.
so we can bracket that in the way that we've bracketed a lot of things in Gentle Madness.
I like that format of symmetry.
Ding-dong.
Nice.
And so that's reading.
The reading chapter, the reading chapter.
What still has to be formulated is a bibliography chapter.
I will have to do an interview with Thomas Tanzel,
I already have done an extensive interview with Father Boyle at the Vatican Library.
We have Carol Fitzgerald in the Rivers of America.
We have Audrey Hahnemann of Hemingway.
We have Owen Gingrich chasing the great Copernicus chase.
scanning, spanning the globe, searching the globe for every possible first and second edition copy of The Revolution of Les Orbis of Copernicus, which he said was once alleged to be the greatest book never read.
He tried to disprove that by looking at the annotations of the earliest readers of that book, and he's come up with some startling findings.
Again, it's the text, and we're not just want to call it bibliography, but what we learn from text.
And I think within this context right here, so this would be a nice full chapter, we can also get into the whole concept of the history of the book, which is really a fairly recent social science.
In the last 20 years,
The French call it.
Robert Darnton at Princeton.
Wouldn't it be great if I could do an interview with Darnton at Princeton on this subject?
To just go back briefly, I was mentioning writers, creators.
I failed to include there Robert Cole's books that you can live
your life by, stories that you can live your life by.
You know, maybe that could also go with a pediatrician.
I don't know, we'll have to see.
But it's pretty good.
It would work.
I want to get into the canon debate, the culture wars.
I think I already have a tentative lead on that, a beginning academic debates are best left to academics.
But we are talking about books and books that it is threatened may no longer be part of college curriculum, which are said to no longer be relevant.
So, we will get into that discussion, and that discussion will be advanced by people I've already interviewed.
Harold Bloom, Alfred Kazin, Helen Vendler, Robert Fagels, a classicist and translator.
Books by Robert Alter.
I don't think I have to interview him.
He's on the record in his book, which is very good.
So that's on the canon.
And let's just remember that we've got all this stuff, all these people.
I'm not going to resolve the canon debate, but I do have people arguing it.
And, of course, we've had the Association of Literary Critics and Scholars, ALCS, of which I'm a member.
in fact.
And I pretend that one of their meetings and Roger Shattuck's comments there.
And I don't think we need an interview with him.
We've got his comments, everything caught him from that, our impressions from that.
And maybe Mary Lefkowitz, who wrote, not out of Africa, in response to this Afro-centrist claim that the Greeks stole from the Africans.
an absurd notion but it has to be addressed and she addressed it so we've got the canon there to a great extent and so where do we go from there we've done the readers we've done the bibliography we've done the canon um i guess at this point i would do the san francisco public library story
case study of public libraries, and that takes care of that.
Public libraries, and then we would work in the New York Public Library.
I really am not going to go to all the public libraries in America by any means, but I think you frame the debate with San Fran, New York as large city libraries.
Let's go to the small town library, which is part of the community.
Maybe we could get Cleveland in there because we've been through Cleveland.
Cleveland is part of the book culture story.
How Cleveland works into here, the idea of book culture.
Book culture in America or in Cleveland?
Middle America.
Well, we'll see, won't we?
We'll see how that works.
So at this point, we do San Francisco public cautionary jail.
and all that entails.
That's a discrete chapter.
That's pretty much like a Texas chapter in General Madness.
From there, let's give them two good ones, bang, bang.
Let's go next to Harvard and Cornell and the institutional chapters.
And we can call this paradigm lost, paradigm regained.
Paradigm lost, paradigm retained.
So we're playing on the two, again, John Milton.
Two of his poems, Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained, but also Retained.
I don't know.
Think about it.
And we start in Harvard, at the Depository.
We talk to Ken Carpenter.
Go with him on a book-starting tour.
We quote him.
about books and now we're kind of really getting into the the deaccession business the history of the printed book business the virtual library the numbers that matter the farmington plan where where subject matters were carved up like like countries on a map like we're back in the late 40s right after world war ii the research library association group sat down and divided up the world
of the books they were going to collect and they were establishing turf.
We get a lot of that in there.
At David Stamm, we interview here.
And I think, by the way, going back to New York Public, San Francisco Public and New York Public, that's the place, that is the place to use the recently disclosed material on the deaccessioning.
of pamphlets and pamphlets and monographs, et cetera.
But Stam's point today, very, very, very stressfully made, he stressed it, it wasn't stressful, but they didn't compromise the research material.
They have the research material.
What they did,
was change formats.
At San Francisco, what they did was dump.
And you got Gina Manoudry saying she does not see her role as a research library.
Well, you know, there you go.
San Fran, New York.
Brand new library, but it doesn't see itself as a research library that's no longer their function.
New York, one of the great research libraries in the world.
And it does.
that's pretty good i like that maybe that's where we use the new york public libraries okay so uh getting back to harvard where we start with the depository and ken carpenter the image i've occasionally used and enjoy using the valley of the kings and books
the books are put to sleep and then we can enter the discussion and then we go to Cornell high above Cayuga's waters in that room the books are sliced and diced they've been guillotined to use the phrase the jargon they look like veal cutlets filleted and pounded and
and ready to be breaded or whatever.
And here they are, sliced and diced, ready to be scanned.
And we go into that whole discussion there.
And what we have here are two Ivy League institutions.
We're framing the debate with two Ivy League institutions, two five-star universities, two great universities, where one is going one way and the other is going another way.
And then we would bring into this discussion our visits to Stanford, Berkeley, Michigan, Toronto, absolutely.
Or maybe we'll save Toronto for the National Library story.
Either way, I'll be working on that as a biblio piece.
I saw Richard Landon last night at the Groydia Club dinner.
And so I'm doing that as the next one.
So we'll bring in Toronto, Michigan, Stanford, Berkeley, Illinois when I go out there.
Let's not forget that school in Monterey.
that was planned without a library, and that I found down in Florida.
Brand new university just opened in 1997.
They outsourced the library.
And Richard Landon, who told me about York University, that when it was established they went and bought books from two bookstores.
And Roger Stoddard, who told me how the fellow who did the job at UMass basically built the library and he's very impressed with it.
All this goes in there.
All this goes in there and how they are part of the virtual revolution.
Don't forget in the bibliography, the little case studies, whether or not it's done in paradigm shift or in the research libraries.
The good things that are done with the computers, how you can do very synergistic things like get all these Blake materials from all over the world and make them available on one site.
I want to talk to Tom Staley at the University of Texas.
He did sound interested in talking to me about that and maybe I can talk to him.
Send them an email and say, I'd like to give you a call, Tom, maybe we can chat.
Because he has this Joyce stuff, and he has this great, great archive at HRC, which they don't make available.
And then you have Ellen Dunlap, who says, we believe in making stuff available.
Put it out there.
Why are you hugging it?
Why are you...
denying people access to what's to be gained.
So, yeah, that could all go into that institutional chapter.
And I think right after the institutional chapter would be the place to do the Lloyd Coatsen story, because it is institutional.
It's a very poignant story.
And that's a discreet story.
Or it could even be in the institutional package.
We'll have to see.
It all depends on the length, but I do believe Coatsen goes by himself about the length of the Shitey story.
And I still have to go down to Princeton.
I'm going to see Bill Joyce and Andrea Immel.
I will try to have a discussion with Harold Shapiro, the president of Princeton.
Put him on the record here.
And that's a very discreet chapter.
But you would bring in here, however, how difficult it has been
for some institutions to deal with major donors who are making very serious demands.
And now Yale, of course, turned down, what was it, $50 million.
Harvard turned down some money because they are making demands on the curriculum.
And I don't know if Cochin is making demands on the curriculum, but he's making demands on the university.
And he's still adding to the collection right here.
I'm told that there's plenty of tons of material out there now that he's just acquired.
So I guess I have to talk to Colton again about this.
So that's Colton right there.
And I think the next one would be the national libraries.
National libraries.
And we have to get into the whole discussion of preservation.
And maybe in that paradigm shift story, maybe that's the place to do it.
virtual stuff, or we can do it, again, as the National Library says, as repositories of cultural heritage.
You talk about Germany, you talk about France, you talk about England, Sweden, where we've been, Belgium if we get there, Spain if we get there, of course LC, Library of Congress,
And we can talk about what these various countries are doing with preservation.
Back to Cornell, don't forget that phrase, phase deterioration.
Somebody else calls it planned deterioration.
You know, I don't want to remember my plan to also
at the Library of Congress.
Maybe we start with the Library of Congress in that vault.
In that vault, we have these papers, 18 documents.
I guess they're secret, sort of secret.
They're confidential, but I know what they are.
I know most of them.
And I had a long conversation with Gene Ashton of Columbia University last night at the Grosier Club.
Very, very important.
and we have to get this case, and maybe this is the place to do it, determining value, the difference between value and worth, value with regard to what something would go for in the marketplace, worth in terms of cultural worth, which in some instances can be inestimable.
This lawyer, this fellow who was admitted to robbing these very rare and precious manuscripts from Columbia,
I said, well, don't you have a Xerox of that letter if you have the content?
Don't you have what's important?
You haven't lost it.
So why is it necessary to have the actual original document?
Well, that's a great way to get into that.
We talked about Archibald McLeish.
I think I've already started this.
How he moved material out of Washington to Fort Knox during World War II to protect
these precious cultural artifacts which are of inestimable worth the value that you cannot calculate.
And I guess I'm going to have to go down to the Federal District Courthouse in New York City and get the particulates of that case.
I just have to work that in when I can.
And I do have to go to Princeton, as I think I've already said, and do a spate of interviews there.
We'll contrast the libraries, the British Library and the French Library.
I think we've already conceived of how we're going to write that, Jacqueline Sanson, looking out on the Michelieu courtyard.
We have David Bradbury in his office during the transition with his Mickey Mouse tie, holding books.
And outside, the trucks are moving, trucks are moving, trucks are moving, 20,000 volumes a day.
and Mickey Mouse holding books.
Very interesting, Nick.
Very interesting.
The Sorcerer's Apprentice, the Walt Disney movie, Fantasia, where Mickey is carrying those buckets of water, and it gets totally out of hand, and he can't keep up with it.
Isn't it interesting that David Bradbury has a tie to the day I'm there?
a Mickey Mouse tie where Mickey Mouse is carrying books.
Gee, that's great.
That is really good.
Before I forget, I was mentioning the Harvard Depository.
You don't want to forget.
You've got to put in the Harvard Medical School Primate Center, even if it's just a couple of graphs.
It's cute.
It's a good line.
The problems with the water.
Is it the monkeys or the books?
The descent of man or the ascent of man?
And so we're kind of getting there, aren't we, now?
We're up to the national libraries.
We've done the public libraries.
We've done the institutional libraries.
We've done the readers.
We've done the canon.
We've done Coton.
We've done San Francisco Public Library.
We've done the booksellers.
We've done the libraries through history.
Book Arts, Dart Hunter, Priscilla Javelas, Making Type, Bindings, Terry Belanger, Dart Hunter, Steinauer Press, people out in Western Massachusetts who still make books, that woman who I met, Ruth Rogers, the special collections librarian at Wellesley College.
I might want to talk to Anne Anninger at the Houghton Library.
You know, books as objects.
Books still as objects.
And that chapter will start... Let's start that chapter with Joe Jacobson at the MIT Media Lab.
discussing the book of the future.
I'm astounded by his youth that he's got this electronic book.
And we have to give old Joe a call.
And then I think we should talk, we could bring in here with Joe Jacobson your trip to Corpus.
You talk to Mark.